log: Add design doc (#4809)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry-go: log/DESIGN.md

# Logs Bridge API

## Abstract

`go.opentelemetry.io/otel/log` provides
[Logs Bridge API](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/logs/bridge-api/).

The initial version of the design and the prototype
was created in [#4725](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-go/pull/4725).

## Background

> The key challenge is to create a well-performant API compliant with the specification.

Reviewer: nit: Link to the spec would be helpful.

> The key challenge is to create a well-performant API compliant with the specification.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The key challenge is to create a performant API compliant with the specification.
```

> The key challenge is to create a well-performant API compliant with the specification.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The key challenge is to create a well-performant API compliant with the specification with an intuitive and user friendly design.
```

Performance is seen as one of the most important characteristics of logging libraries in Go.

## Design

This proposed design aims to:

- be specification compliant,
- be similar to Trace and Metrics API,
- take advantage of both OpenTelemetry and `slog` experience to achieve acceptable performance.

### Module structure

> The Go module consits of the following packages:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Go module structure will consist of the following packages:
```

Author: ```suggestion
The Go module structure consists of the following packages:
```

- `go.opentelemetry.io/otel/log`
- `go.opentelemetry.io/otel/log/embedded`

> - `go.opentelemetry.io/otel/log/noop`

Reviewer: These should not be their own modules similar to tracing and metrics:

- https://pkg.go.dev/go.opentelemetry.io/otel/metric@v1.21.0/embedded
- https://pkg.go.dev/go.opentelemetry.io/otel/metric@v1.21.0/noop
- https://pkg.go.dev/go.opentelemetry.io/otel/trace@v1.21.0/noop
- https://pkg.go.dev/go.opentelemetry.io/otel/trace@v1.21.0/embedded

Author: Yes. One module with multiple packages.

The module name is compliant with
[Artifact Naming](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/logs/bridge-api.md#artifact-naming)
and the package structure is the same as for Trace API and Metrics API.

### LoggerProvider

The [`LoggerProvider` abstraction](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/logs/bridge-api/#loggerprovider)

> is defined as an interface in `provider.go`.

Reviewer: In-lining here helps communicate what the design is:

```suggestion
is defined as an interface:

type LoggerProvider interface {
	Logger(name string, options ...LoggerOption) Logger
}
```

> 

Reviewer: Please add:

- information about how the provider will be configure
- why the logger is an interface and not a struct
- how it will be guarded with an "embedded" type (similar to the trace/metric design) so methods can be added

### Logger

The [`Logger` abstraction](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/logs/bridge-api/#logger)

> is defined as an interface in `logger.go`.

Reviewer: Similar here, in-lining the definition will help contextualize. We can always add a link to the permanent definition after it is implemented.

As it is now, there is no place to comment on the `Emit` method definition.

Canceling the context pass to `Emit` should not affect record processing.
Among other things, log messages may be necessary to debug a
cancellation-related problem.
The context is used to pass request-scoped values.
The API implementation should handle the trace context passed
in `ctx` to the `Emit` method.

### Record

The [`LogRecord` abstraction](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/logs/bridge-api/#logger)
is defined as a struct in `record.go`.

## Usage examples

### Log Bridge implementation

The log bridges can use [`sync.Pool`](https://pkg.go.dev/sync#Pool)

> for reducing the number of allocations when passing attributes.

Reviewer: This seems like a relavant topic for the `Record` section. It does not seem to relate to the next paragraph.

The bridge implementation should do its best to pass
the `ctx` containing the trace context from the caller
so it can later passed via `Emit`.
Re-constructing a `context.Context` with [`trace.ContextWithSpanContext`](https://pkg.go.dev/go.opentelemetry.io/otel/trace#ContextWithSpanContext)
and [`trace.NewSpanContext`](https://pkg.go.dev/go.opentelemetry.io/otel/trace#NewSpanContext)

> would usually involve more memory allocations.

Reviewer: Why not include this in the `Logger` section where the `Emit` method is defined?

Author: A decided to describe it in a separate section

```

### API implementation

If the implementation processes the record asynchronously,
then it has to copy record attributes,
in order to avoid use after free bugs and race condition.

Excerpt of how SDK can implement the `Logger` interface.

```go
type Logger struct {
	scope     instrumentation.Scope
	processor Processor
}

func (l *Logger) Emit(ctx context.Context, r log.Record) {
	// Create log record model.
	record, err := toModel(r)
	if err != nil {
		otel.Handle(err)
		return
	}
	l.processor.Process(ctx, record) // Note: A batch processor copies the attributes.
}
```

A test implementation of the the `Logger` interface
used for benchmarking is in `internal/writer_logger.go`.

## Compatibility

The backwards compatibility is achieved using the `embedded` design pattern
that is already used in Trace API and Metrics API.

Additionally, the `Logger.Emit` functionality can be extended by
adding new exported fields to the `Record` struct.

## Benchmarking

The benchmarks take inspiration from [`slog`](https://pkg.go.dev/log/slog),
because for the Go team it was also critical to create API that would be fast

> and interoperable with existing logging packages.[^1][^2]

Reviewer: This does not seem relevant for an API design document.

Author: I disagree as benchmarks are validating the design from performance perpective.

Reviewer 2: I think a benchmarking section is useful, but we should at least link to benchmarks we did that support our chosen approach.

Author: Do you think that adding a reference to https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-go/blob/7fc957ab5a56c37b48a5223d9f01062ab8e74c32/log/internal/bench_test.go will be good enough or should do something more? I planned to update the design doc with hyperlinks to source files once they are in the repository. I updated the description of https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-go/issues/3827 to not forget about it.

Reviewer 2: IMO if there is a comment somewhere with the benchmark results that links to the benchmark code, that is even better.  But i'm OK with any reference that helps a future reader understand why we chose this approach.

Author: PTAL 31134025

Reviewer 2: LGTM.

- [Passing struct as parameter to LoggerProvider.Logger](#passing-struct-as-parameter-to-loggerproviderlogger).

### Logger

The [`Logger` abstraction](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/logs/bridge-api/#logger)
is defined as an interface:

```go
type Logger interface {
	embedded.Logger
	Emit(ctx context.Context, record Record)
}
```

The specification may add new operations to `Logger`.
The interface may have methods added without a package major version bump.
The embedds `embedded.Logger` to help inform an API implementation
author about this non-standard API evolution.
This approach is already used in Trace API and Metrics API.

### Logger.Emit

The `Emit` method implements the [`Emit a LogRecord` operation](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/logs/bridge-api/#emit-a-logrecord).

Calls to `Emit` are supposed to be on the hot path.
Therefore, in order to reduce the number of heap allocations,
the [`LogRecord` abstraction](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/logs/bridge-api/#emit-a-logrecord),
is defined as a `struct`:

```go
type Record struct {
	Timestamp         time.Time
	ObservedTimestamp time.Time
	Severity          Severity
	SeverityText      string

> 	Body              string

Author: I know noticed that [the spec defines](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/logs/data-model.md#field-body) Body to be [`any`](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/logs/data-model.md#type-any) (not a `string`.)

[Java](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java/blob/main/api/all/src/main/java/io/opentelemetry/api/logs/LogRecordBuilder.java) (stable logs): Defines Body as `string`.

[.NET](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-dotnet/blob/main/src/OpenTelemetry.Api/Logs/LogRecordData.cs) (stable logs): Defines Body as `string`.

[C++](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-dotnet/blob/main/src/OpenTelemetry.Api/Logs/LogRecordData.cs) (stable logs): Defines Body as attribute value and [a map as value is not supported](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-cpp/blob/main/api/include/opentelemetry/common/attribute_value.h).

[Python](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-python/blob/main/opentelemetry-sdk/src/opentelemetry/sdk/_logs/_internal/__init__.py) (experimental logs): Defines Body as `Any` (in Python sense which means it can be anything).

Author: I propose to change the `Body` type from `string` to `attribute.Value`.

Additionally, regarding having maps as values. 

I also propose create an issue in the specification (and add it to the project) to clarify if type is intended to be the same as attribute value type or something different. I would also reference the issue in the design doc for additional tracking. This is also related to both open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification#376 and open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification#622.

Author: CC @tigrannajaryan

Author: After reading the spec again I see that https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/logs/data-model/#field-body says:

> First-party Applications SHOULD use a string message. However, a structured body SHOULD be used to preserve the semantics of structured logs emitted by Third-party Applications. 

From my understanding of https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/logs/#new-first-party-application-logs, the First-party Applications are the ones that use the Bridge API. Does it mean that Body should be defined as `string` in Bridge API (as done in Java and .NET)?

Author: https://github.com/pellared/opentelemetry-go/pull/5 shoes that having `Record.Body` as `any` ("object") would reduce the performance. Therefore, it makes more sense to define it as a `string` especially that I am not aware of any Go library that accepts `any` as a log record (it is always a text message with key-value attributes).

Author: Besides [Logs Data Model](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/logs/data-model.md#field-body) defines Body to be [any](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/logs/data-model.md#type-any). However, IMO the definition of `any` is wrong. It should be something that is used in given language to pass any type of data. e.g. in Java and .NET it is object , in Go any , in Python Any, in C++ probably std::any. The exporters would be responsible for marshaling the Body to expected output (e.g. text form, or OTLP protobuf).

Author: I documented why `Body` us defined as `string` and not `any`.

I plan to make more clarifications in [Logs Data Model](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/logs/data-model.md#field-body).

Author: After sync with @jack-berg it occurs that using `attribute.Value` (like in C++) might be more appropriate. I think I will also explore this idea.

> The idea is that some log APIs allow recording of structured messages, and `AnyValue` allows that structure to be retained in the body, instead of having it flattened to a string.
> 
> Accepting object forces exporters to do to much. Its unbounded and serializing it would be very brittle. `AnyValue` has bounds - it has an enumeration of allowed types.
> 
> So serializing it much more simple, requiring just a switch on the type. `AnyValue` also has a helpful asString() method to serialize in a string representation. Exporters which don’t support structured values can use this to retain all the information in an encoded format.

Reviewer 3: I do not think limiting `Body` to `string` is correct. It is not mandatory for applications to use string, it is a recommendation that may be violated with good justification (hence SHOULD and not MUST). The [experimental Events API](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/logs/event-api.md) that is built on top of Log Bridge API will likely use non-string Body (this is still under a debate).

An alternate approach that may be worth considering is to have more than one variation of Emit method if you cannot make one Emit function performant enough for all use cases, each variation support a different set of parameters or different types for Body, etc. This is not prohibited by the spec. I don't like it but it is a possible option to consider.

`any` is a type defined in the spec. It matches exactly the definition of [AnyValue](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-proto/blob/c56093a326ec7d9c2436c778c50f656cb73b718c/opentelemetry/proto/common/v1/common.proto#L28) in OTLP. We made a choice of what types we want to be representable by `any`. This is part of a Stable spec doc, so breaking changes are no longer allowed.

How exactly you model `any` type in the language implementation is the particular SDK's design choice.

If you want to use Go's `any` type for it it is up to you, just be aware that you must limit the _output_ values to what is defined by the spec. This is not an exporter responsibility, it is the API implementation responsibility. The API implementation is not allowed to accept data types that are not defined in the spec's data model (for example you cannot accept time.Duration as a value because data model does not allow it).

Alternatively you can define AnyValue as a strongly-typed Go struct that can represent all valid types.

Reviewer 3: >However, I am not sure how a bridge would now how to construct a attribute.Value from some abstract structured-body.

That is defined by the spec: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/common/attribute-type-mapping.md

Reviewer 4: In java, the log bridge API has methods to set the body as a string or AnyValue. The AnyValue method is currently experimental and requires jumping through extra hoops to use. The string method is essentially syntactic sugar for setting the Body to an AnyValue string type. The string method will be the most commonly used, but its important to have the AnyValue method to preserve the structure of any logs recorded using structured logging APIs.

Author: > I do not think limiting `Body` to `string` is correct.

This is not clearly defined in the specification. See: https://cloud-native.slack.com/archives/C01N7PP1THC/p1704907537212259

Personally, I would add another field e.g. `BodyStructured attribute.Value` to `Record`. The user should set only `Body` or `BodyStructured`. But this can be added later as it is not a breaking change. Also it would be good to resolve open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification#376 before that.

Author: I created https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/pull/3814

Author: I also created https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/pull/3827

Besides I think it would be bad to define `Body` as `attribute.Value`. I think it would be better and safer to have a separate type and not couple Body value to attribute representation.

Author: After today's Specification SIG meeting I plan to define `Body` as a type that would enable representing a structured log which will be different than `attribute.Value`.

Author: PR for the prototype https://github.com/pellared/opentelemetry-go/pull/7

> 	Attributes        []attribute.KeyValue

Reviewer 5: One question I have is will our current `attribute.Keyvalue` work as the [Log version of attributes](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/logs/data-model.md#field-attributes).  Currently the Spec defines these as `Map<string, any>`, where [`any`](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/logs/data-model.md#type-any) can be, scaler (our int, float, string, bool), byte slice (string), an array of the above, or a Map<string, any> (we don't support).

Would that mean we would need to add support for that into the attribute package, and if so, what's the effect on other signals that don't allow that?  
If we don't, will we have to add a conversion from attributes to log attributes?

Author: Great finding that I have totally missed. I am not sure at the moment as https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/common/README.md#attribute does not say anyything about having maps in attributes. I have also found https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/issues/376 and https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/issues/622. Thoughts?

Author: Java (stable logs): [reuses a common attribute type](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java/blob/main/api/all/src/main/java/io/opentelemetry/api/logs/LogRecordBuilder.java) and [a map as value is not supported](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java/blob/main/api/all/src/main/java/io/opentelemetry/api/common/AttributeType.java)

.NET (stable logs): [models attributes](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-dotnet/blob/main/src/OpenTelemetry.Api/Logs/LogRecordAttributeList.cs) (everywhere) as [`KeyValuePair<string, object?>`](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.collections.generic.keyvaluepair-2)

C++ (stable logs): [reuses a common attribute type](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-cpp/blob/main/api/include/opentelemetry/logs/log_record.h) and [a map as value is not supported](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-cpp/blob/main/api/include/opentelemetry/common/attribute_value.h)

Python (experimental logs): [reuses a common attribute type](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-python/blob/main/opentelemetry-sdk/src/opentelemetry/sdk/_logs/_internal/__init__.py) and [a map as value is not supported](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-python/blob/main/opentelemetry-api/src/opentelemetry/util/types.py)

I am leaning that it is a bug in the specification and that attributes values do not currently accept maps as values. If it would be the case then it should work for all signals.

Author: CC @tigrannajaryan

Author: I think (I am aware that I can be totally wrong) that in https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/logs/data-model.md:
- `Attributes` should be defined as (reference) https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/tree/main/specification/common
- `Resource` should be defined as (reference) https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/resource/sdk.md

Reviewer 3: >Attributes should be simply defined as (reference) https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/tree/main/specification/common

That won't work. Common attributes don't allow nesting. Log attributes (and Body) allow it.

Maybe this is another opportunity to push for resolution on https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/issues/376 and make common attribute definition equal to `any` type definition in log data model.

Reviewer 3: Maybe this is another opportunity to push for resolution on https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/issues/376

Author: > Maybe this is another opportunity to push for resolution on open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification#376

I agree as currently none languages (expect .NET) does not allow nesting.

Author: @tigrannajaryan  As far as I checked NONE languages support nested log attributes. All languages reuses common attributes abstraction (Java, C++, Python) or transformation (.NET).

I think we have a big precedence that log attributes may use the same representation as other signals and that  addressing https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/issues/376 would solve the problem for all languages.

Author: I created https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/pull/3816

Author: I plan to create define dedicated type for log attributes. If https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/pull/3816 will be accepted then I will simply change it back to use the `attribute` package. I will open an issue for tracking.

Author: PR for the prototype https://github.com/pellared/opentelemetry-go/pull/7

To reduce the number of allocations of the attributes,
the `Record` could be modeled similarly to [`slog.Record`](https://pkg.go.dev/log/slog#Record).
`Record` could have `WalkAttributes` and `AddAttributes` methods,
like [`slog.Record.Attrs`](https://pkg.go.dev/log/slog#Record.Attrs)
and [`slog.Record.AddAttrs`](https://pkg.go.dev/log/slog#Record.AddAttrs),
in order to achieve high-performance when accessing and setting attributes efficiently.
`Record` would have a `AttributesLen` method that returns
the number of attributes to allow slice preallocation
when converting records to a different representation.

However, during the analysis[^5] we decided that having
a simple slice in `Record` is more flexible.

It is possible to achieve better performance, by using [`sync.Pool`](https://pkg.go.dev/sync#Pool).

Having a simple `Record` without any logic makes it possible
that the optimisations can be done in API implementation
and bridge implementations.
For instance, in order to reduce the heap allocations of attributes,
the bridge implementation can use a `sync.Pool`.
In such case, the API implementation (SDK) would need to copy the attributes

> when the records are processed asynchrounsly,

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
when the records are processed asynchronously,
```

in order to avoid use after free bugs and race conditions.

For reference, here is the reason why `slog` does not use `sync.Pool`[^2]:

> We can use a sync pool for records though we decided not to.
You can but it's a bad idea for us. Why?
Because users have control of Records.
Handler writers can get their hands on a record
and we'd have to ask them to free it
or try to free it magically at some some point.
But either way, they could get themselves in trouble by freeing it twice
or holding on to one after they free it.
That's a use after free bug and that's why `zerolog` was problematic for us.
`zerolog` as as part of its speed exposes a pool allocated value to users
if you use `zerolog` the normal way, that you'll see in all the examples,
you will never encounter a problem.
But if you do something a little out of the ordinary you can get
use after free bugs and we just didn't want to put that in the standard library.

> We took a different decision, because the key difference is that `slog`

Reviewer 2: We also aren't actually exposing a sync.Pool to users, right?  My understanding is that each bridge will use a sync.Pool as an implementation detail.

Author: Correct

Author: PTAL https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-go/pull/4809/commits/3113402512fc65e9e1f097316a117ebfda10a4a1

Author: PTAL 90b38570

> We can use a sync pool for records though we decided not to.
You can but it's a bad idea for us. Why?
Because users have control of Records.
Handler writers can get their hands on a record
and we'd have to ask them to free it
or try to free it magically at some some point.
But either way, they could get themselves in trouble by freeing it twice
or holding on to one after they free it.
That's a use after free bug and that's why `zerolog` was problematic for us.
`zerolog` as as part of its speed exposes a pool allocated value to users
if you use `zerolog` the normal way, that you'll see in all the examples,
you will never encounter a problem.
But if you do something a little out of the ordinary you can get
use after free bugs and we just didn't want to put that in the standard library.

We took a different decision, because the key difference is that `slog`
is a logging library and Logs Bridge API is only a logging abstraction.
We want to provide more flexibility and offer better speed.
Unlike `zerolog`, we are not using a `sync.Pool` in the logger implementation,
which would expose to the issue described above.

> Instead, we the `sync.Pool` should be used bridges, which are the users,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Instead, `sync.Pool` is used by bridges, which are the users,
```

The [`Logger` abstraction](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/logs/bridge-api/#logger)
is defined as an interface:

```go
type Logger interface {
	embedded.Logger
	Emit(ctx context.Context, record Record)
}
```

The specification may add new operations to `Logger`.
The interface may have methods added without a package major version bump.
The embedds `embedded.Logger` to help inform an API implementation
author about this non-standard API evolution.
This approach is already used in Trace API and Metrics API.

### Logger.Emit

The `Emit` method implements the [`Emit a LogRecord` operation](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/logs/bridge-api/#emit-a-logrecord).

[`Context` associated with the `LogRecord`](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/context/)
is accepted as a `context.Context` method argument.

Calls to `Emit` are supposed to be on the hot path.
Therefore, in order to reduce the number of heap allocations,
the [`LogRecord` abstraction](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/logs/bridge-api/#emit-a-logrecord),
is defined as a `struct`:

```go
type Record struct {
	Timestamp         time.Time
	ObservedTimestamp time.Time
	Severity          Severity

> 	SeverityText      string

Author: Do you find it acceptable to keep the `SeverityNumber` constant as e.g. `SeverityTrace2` and NOT `SeverityNumberTrace2` (I would find it unnecessarily verbose).

> 	SeverityText      string

Reviewer 5: As far as I can tell these are actually independent in the API.  While the data-model says you can use the short name for the Text if it's empty and the Number is populated, the API only says that you can accept both at the same time.  

Because we will probably use the short name somewhere, I would suggest that we use `stringer` to make the short names.

> 	SeverityText      string

Author: > As far as I can tell these are actually independent in the API. While the data-model says you can use the short name for the Text if it's empty and the Number is populated, the API only says that you can accept both at the same time.

That is indeed important in scope of https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-go/pull/4809#issuecomment-1887875986 as it would be then better to have them separated 👍 

> Because we will probably use the short name somewhere, I would suggest that we use stringer to make the short names.

I think this should live in the SDK as this is defined in the Data Model and it is only a recommendation in [Displaying Severity](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/logs/data-model.md#displaying-severity).

@MrAlias @MadVikingGod Are you OK with doing nothing and just resolving this thread?

> 	SeverityText      string

Reviewer: If the plan is to change to a getter/setter design, I'm fine resolving this and opening a new thread if the issue relates to the redesign.

> 	SeverityText      string

Author: Resolving per https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-go/pull/4809/commits/35ff8f784bd50d6efd5270bb6186d1d6b4953a69

	Body              string
	Attributes        []attribute.KeyValue
}
```

[`Timestamp`](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/logs/data-model/#field-timestamp)
is defined as `time.Time` type.

[`ObservedTimestamp`](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/logs/data-model/#field-observedtimestamp)
is defined as `time.Time` type.

[`SeverityNumber`](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/logs/data-model/#field-severitynumber)
is defined as a type and constants:

```go
type Severity int

const (

> 	SeverityTrace Severity = iota + 1

Author: I can do that.

> 	SeverityTrace Severity = iota + 1

Author: Addressed 5a4d178b

> 	SeverityTrace Severity = iota + 1

Author: After second though and discussion with @MrAlias I will revert the change mentioned above as https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/logs/data-model.md#displaying-severity is about "display" and not Bridge API. `SeverityTrace = SeverityTrace1` will make the API more user-friendly.

> 	SeverityTrace Severity = iota + 1

Author: Addressed 0cd06778

  as otherwise it may lead to data races as the user may modify the passed attributes
  e.g. because of using `sync.Pool` to reduce the number of allocation.

- The [specification requires](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/logs/bridge-api/#emit-a-logrecord)
  use the current time as observed timestamp if the passed is empty.

`Emit` can be extended by adding new exported fields to the `Record` struct.

Rejected alternatives:

- [Record as interface](#record-as-interface)
- [Options as parameter to Logger.Emit](#options-as-parameter-to-loggeremit)
- [Passing record as pointer to Logger.Emit](#passing-record-as-pointer-to-loggeremit)
- [Logger.WithAttributes](#loggerwithattributes)
- [Record attributes like in slog.Record](#record-attributes-like-in-slogrecord)
- [Record.Body as any](#recordbody-as-any)

### noop package

The `go.opentelemetry.io/otel/log/noop` package provides
[Logs Bridge API No-Op Implementation](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/logs/noop/).

### Trace context correlation

The bridge implementation should do its best to pass
the `ctx` containing the trace context from the caller

> so it can later passed via `Logger.Emit`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
so it can later be passed via `Logger.Emit`.
```

Re-constructing a `context.Context` with [`trace.ContextWithSpanContext`](https://pkg.go.dev/go.opentelemetry.io/otel/trace#ContextWithSpanContext)
and [`trace.NewSpanContext`](https://pkg.go.dev/go.opentelemetry.io/otel/trace#NewSpanContext)

> would usually involve more memory allocations.

Reviewer: I'm not sure I follow what this is trying to say. Is it saying that we won't construct a context for users?

Author: Yes. The `context.Context` should be passed by the user.

Reviewer: Maybe something like "It is not expected that users reconstruct a `context.Context` ..."

Author: PTAL 3f25db7c

Passing via value feels safer because of the following reasons.

It follows the design of [`slog.Handler`](https://pkg.go.dev/log/slog#Handler).

It should reduce the possibility of a heap allocation.

The user would not be able to pass `nil`.
Therefore, it reduces the possiblity to have a nil pointer dereference.

### Passing struct as parameter to LoggerProvider.Logger

Similarly to `Logger.Emit`, we could have something like:

```go
type LoggerProvider interface{
	embedded.LoggerProvider
	Logger(name context.Context, config LoggerConfig)
}
```

The drawback of this idea would be that this would be
a different design from Trace and Metrics API.

The performance of acquiring a logger is not as critical
as the performance of emitting a log record. While a single
HTTP/RPC handler could write hundreds of logs, it should not
create a new logger for each log entry.
The application should reuse loggers whenever possible.

### Logger.WithAttributes

We could add `WithAttributes` to the `Logger` interface.
Then `Record` could be a simple struct with only exported fields.
The idea was that the SDK would implement the performance improvements
instead of doing it in the API.

> This would allow having different optimisation strategies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This would allow having different optimization strategies.
```

During the analysis[^4], it occurred that the main problem of this proposal
is that the variadic slice passed to an interface method is always heap allocated.

Moreover, the logger returned by `WithAttribute` was allocated on the heap.

At last, the proposal was not specification compliant.

### Record attributes like in slog.Record

To reduce the number of allocations of the attributes,
the `Record` could be modeled similarly to [`slog.Record`](https://pkg.go.dev/log/slog#Record).
`Record` could have `WalkAttributes` and `AddAttributes` methods,
like [`slog.Record.Attrs`](https://pkg.go.dev/log/slog#Record.Attrs)
and [`slog.Record.AddAttrs`](https://pkg.go.dev/log/slog#Record.AddAttrs),
in order to achieve high-performance when accessing and setting attributes efficiently.
`Record` would have a `AttributesLen` method that returns
the number of attributes to allow slice preallocation
when converting records to a different representation.

However, during the analysis[^5] we decided that having
a simple slice in `Record` is more flexible.

> It is possible to achieve better performance, by using [`sync.Pool`](https://pkg.go.dev/sync#Pool).

Reviewer: Using something like this will mean that the SDK is going to be required to copy all passed attributes before it returns from the call to `Emit`. Is this something we just plan to document?

Author: It is documented in `### Logger.Emit` section:

> - The method should copy the record's attributes in case of asynchronous processing
  as otherwise it may lead to data races as the user may modify the passed attributes
  e.g. because of using `sync.Pool` to reduce the number of allocation.

func WithInstrumentationAttributes(attr ...attribute.KeyValue) LoggerOption
func WithSchemaURL(schemaURL string) LoggerOption
```

Implementation requirements:

- The [specification requires](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/logs/bridge-api/#concurrency-requirements)
  the method to be safe to be called concurrently.

- The method should use some default name if the passed name is empty
  in order to meet the [specification's SDK requirement](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/logs/sdk/#logger-creation)
  to return a working logger when an invalid name is passed
  as well as to resemble the behavior of getting tracers and meters.

`Logger` can be extended by adding new `LoggerOption` options
and adding new exported fields to the `LoggerConfig` struct.
This design is already used in Trace API for getting tracers
and in Metrics API for getting meters.

Rejected alternative:

- [Passing struct as parameter to LoggerProvider.Logger](#passing-struct-as-parameter-to-loggerproviderlogger).

### Logger

The [`Logger` abstraction](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/logs/bridge-api/#logger)
is defined as an interface:

```go
type Logger interface {
	embedded.Logger

> 	Emit(ctx context.Context, record Record)

Reviewer 3: Did we settle on pass-by-value being the best option (for Record parameter)?

Author: So far yes. See "Passing record as pointer to Logger.Emit" section in "Rejected alternatives".

is defined as `time.Time` type.

[`SeverityNumber`](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/logs/data-model/#field-severitynumber)
is defined as a type and constants:

```go
type Severity int

const (
	SeverityTrace Severity = iota + 1
	SeverityTrace2
	SeverityTrace3
	SeverityTrace4
	SeverityDebug
	SeverityDebug2
	SeverityDebug3
	SeverityDebug4
	SeverityInfo
	SeverityInfo2
	SeverityInfo3
	SeverityInfo4
	SeverityWarn
	SeverityWarn2
	SeverityWarn3
	SeverityWarn4
	SeverityError
	SeverityError2
	SeverityError3
	SeverityError4
	SeverityFatal
	SeverityFatal2
	SeverityFatal3
	SeverityFatal4
)
```

[`SeverityText`](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/logs/data-model/#field-severitytext)
is defined as `string` type.

[`Body`](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/logs/data-model/#field-body)
is defined as `string` type as the specification says:

> First-party Applications SHOULD use a string message.

[Log record attributes](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/logs/data-model/#field-attributes)
are defined a regular slice of `attribute.KeyValue`.
The users can use [`sync.Pool`](https://pkg.go.dev/sync#Pool)

> for reducing the number of allocations when passing attributes.

Reviewer 3: This is unclear. How do you use a pool to reduce attribute allocations?

Author: I will add a snippet from the prototype.

Author: Resolving per https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-go/pull/4809/commits/35ff8f784bd50d6efd5270bb6186d1d6b4953a69

Implementation requirements:

- The [specification requires](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/logs/bridge-api/#concurrency-requirements)
  the method to be safe to be called concurrently.

- The method should not interrupt the record processing if the context is canceled
  per ["ignoring context cancellation" guideline](../CONTRIBUTING.md#ignoring-context-cancellation).

- The method handle the trace context passed via `ctx` argument in order to meet the
  [specification's SDK requirement](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/logs/sdk/#readablelogrecord)
  to populate the trace context fields from the resolved context.

- The method should not modify the record's attribute as it may be reused by caller.

> - The method should copy the record's attributes in case of asynchronous processing

Reviewer 3: I wonder if this leads overall to better performance compared to just letting GC do its job. Has this been benchmarked on large and complex nested attribute values?

Author: It is not about performance. It is about correctness in  order to avoid data races.

Author: This is true but it is a general guideline for API implementations (e.g. for resting). It is possible that the SDK would always create need attributes. Probably the SDK will use a sync.Pool to decrease numer of allocs and decrease the presure on GC. It will be explored when working on Logs SDK design+prototype.

Author: @tigrannajaryan Resolving. Feel free to unresolve if you do not agree with my arguments.

Author: > guarantee that the attributes won't change after the call returns

I do not think it is possible.

Author: SIG meeting:

We agreed that it would be good to ask users to not mutate the record after passing it to `Emit` similarly to https://pkg.go.dev/log/slog#GroupValue. We can still keep the recommendation API to copy the copy as some users may not read the docs.

Author: Addressed 60cb10a3

Thank you

	body              string

	// The fields below are for optimizing the implementation of
	// attributes.
	front [5]attribute.KeyValue
	nFront int // The number of attributes in front.
	back []attribute.KeyValue
}
```

[`Timestamp`](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/logs/data-model/#field-timestamp)
is accessed using following methods:

```go
func (r Record) Timestamp() time.Time 
func (r *Record) SetTimestamp(t time.Time) 
```

[`ObservedTimestamp`](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/logs/data-model/#field-observedtimestamp)
is accessed using following methods:

```go
func (r Record) ObservedTimestamp() time.Time 
func (r *Record) SetObservedTimestamp(t time.Time) 
```

[`SeverityNumber`](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/logs/data-model/#field-severitynumber)
is accessed using following methods:

```go
func (r Record) Severity() Severity
func (r *Record) SetSeverity(s Severity)
```

`Severity` type is defined and constants are based on
[Displaying Severity recommendation](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/logs/data-model/#displaying-severity).
Additionally, `Severity[Level]1` constants are defined to make the API more readable and user friendly.

```go

> type Severity int

Author: By @MadVikingGod:

> Because we will probably use the short name somewhere, I would suggest that we use stringer to make the short names.

I think it is a good idea to implement Stringer for all enum-like types. It would be helpful at least for debugging. I noticed that `slog` also implements stringer for "attribute value kinds".

Author: SIG meeting:
We can postpone the implementation of `String` even after making the Bridge API stable as it won't be a breaking change. Especially if we will have no agreement on the `string` representation.

Author: Addressed 6a47a3cdff9f2bdde41bcc1291d42d739a9b8a98

author about this non-standard API evolution.
This approach is already used in Trace API and Metrics API.

### Logger.Emit

The `Emit` method implements the [`Emit a LogRecord` operation](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/logs/bridge-api/#emit-a-logrecord).

[`Context` associated with the `LogRecord`](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/context/)
is accepted as a `context.Context` method argument.

Calls to `Emit` are supposed to be on the hot path.
Therefore, in order to reduce the number of heap allocations,
the [`LogRecord` abstraction](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/logs/bridge-api/#emit-a-logrecord),
is defined as a `Record` type:

```go
type Record struct {
	timestamp         time.Time
	observedTimestamp time.Time
	severity          Severity
	severityText      string
	body              Value

	// The fields below are for optimizing the implementation of
	// attributes.
	front [5]KeyValue
	nFront int // The number of attributes in front.
	back []KeyValue
}
```

[`Timestamp`](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/logs/data-model/#field-timestamp)
is accessed using following methods:

```go

> func (r Record) Timestamp() time.Time 

Author: From https://go.dev/tour/methods/8:

> In general, all methods on a given type should have either value or pointer receivers, but not a mixture of both. (We'll see why over the next few pages.)

From https://go.dev/wiki/CodeReviewComments#receiver-type:

> Don’t mix receiver types. Choose either pointers or struct types for all available methods.

However, [`slog.Record`](https://pkg.go.dev/log/slog#Record) mixes the receiver types to improve performance. See: https://github.com/golang/go/issues/56345#issuecomment-1302563756

>> some receiver of Record struct is by value

> Passing Records by value means they incur no heap allocation. That improves performance overall, even though they are copied.

Also from https://go.dev/wiki/CodeReviewComments#receiver-type:

> there are times when a value receiver makes sense, usually for reasons of efficiency, such as for small unchanging structs

I think it should be documented. I can try doing some benchmarks, but I think it may be hard as I guess compiler optimization can kick in.

Let me know what you think and if you have any concerns.

Author: SIG meeting:
We should have a proof for https://github.com/golang/go/issues/56345#issuecomment-1302563756.
I will work on it.

Author: I created https://github.com/pellared/opentelemetry-go/pull/8 and the benchmarks run on Go 1.21 do not show any noticeable differences.

@jba, are you able help and share what is the scenario when having all methods of `slog.Record` with a pointer receiver would cause a heap allocation? Thanks in advance.

Author: Addressed https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-go/pull/4809/commits/499da4e003d13522f02ba6813aaabfc30691d5a7

Keeping the conversation open for a few days to give a chance for @jba to comment.

Reviewer 7: Hi, sorry for the delay, I was on vacation.

The guideline to avoid mixing receiver types is a good one, but it is just that—a guideline. There are exceptions.

Record is a value type, so that calls to `slog.Handler.Handle` do not result in heap allocation. So all of `Record`s methods should have value receivers. But some methods change the receiver, so they have to have pointer receivers.

To answer your question, I'm not sure if making all the methods have pointer receivers would affect allocation or performance. Probably not significantly. But `Record` has a mix for the reason I gave above.

It should be more user friendly to have them separated.
Especially when having getter and setter methods, setting one value
when the other is already set would be unpleasant.

## Reuse attribute package

It was tempting to reuse the existing
[https://pkg.go.dev/go.opentelemetry.io/otel/attribute] package
for defining log attributes and body.

However, this would be wrong because [the log attribute definition](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/logs/data-model/#field-attributes)
is different from [the common attribute definition](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/common/#attribute).

Moreover, it there is nothing telling that [the body definition](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/logs/data-model/#field-body)
has anything in common with a common attribute value.

Therefore, we define new types representing the abstract types defined
in the [Logs Data Model](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/logs/data-model/#definitions-used-in-this-document).

## Open issues

### Reusing common attributes

Currently, logs attributes are different from common (resource, trace, metrics) attributes.
However, there may be a desire to make unify them

> as some languages already use common attributes for defining log attributes.[^7]

Author: I am not sure if it is still an issue given this: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/pull/2888#issuecomment-1904888370.

WDYT?

Author: SIG meeting:
We can postpone the implementation of `String` even after making the Bridge API stable as it won't be a breaking change. Especially if we will have no agreement on the `string` representation.

func (r Record) AttributesLen() int
```

Additionally, `Record` has a `Clone` method facilities
coping a record with no shared state (attributes "back" slice):

```go
func (r Record) Clone() Record
```

The records attributes design and implemntation is based on
[`slog.Record`](https://pkg.go.dev/log/slog#Record).
It allows achieving high-performance access and manipulation of the attributes
while keeping the API user friendly.
It relieves the user from making his own improvements
for reducing the number of allocations when passing attributes.

The following defintions are implementing the abstractions
described in [the specification](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/logs/#new-first-party-application-logs):

```go
type Value struct{}

type Kind int

const (
	KindEmpty Kind = iota
	KindBool
	KindFloat64
	KindInt64
	KindString
	KindBytes
	KindList
	KindMap
)

func (v Value) Kind() Kind

func StringValue(value string)

func IntValue(v int) Value

func Int64Value(v int64) Value

func Float64Value(v float64) Value

func BoolValue(v bool) Value

func BytesValue(v []byte) Value

func ListValue(vs ...Value) Value

func MapValue(kvs ...KeyValue) Value

func (v Value) Any() any

> func (v Value) String() string

Author: Should we rename the methods to `As[Type]` so that `AsString` would panic if the kind is not `KindString` or do we prefer to have `String` and return a string representation of each Kind?

Author: Addressed 16a5fbf26643215e879e49b06eec8f7b446

	body              Value

	// The fields below are for optimizing the implementation of
	// attributes.
	front [5]KeyValue
	nFront int // The number of attributes in front.
	back []KeyValue
}
```

[`Timestamp`](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/logs/data-model/#field-timestamp)
is accessed using following methods:

```go
func (r *Record) Timestamp() time.Time 
func (r *Record) SetTimestamp(t time.Time) 
```

[`ObservedTimestamp`](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/logs/data-model/#field-observedtimestamp)
is accessed using following methods:

```go
func (r *Record) ObservedTimestamp() time.Time 
func (r *Record) SetObservedTimestamp(t time.Time) 
```

[`SeverityNumber`](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/logs/data-model/#field-severitynumber)
is accessed using following methods:

```go
func (r *Record) Severity() Severity
func (r *Record) SetSeverity(s Severity)
```

`Severity` type is defined and constants are based on
[Displaying Severity recommendation](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/logs/data-model/#displaying-severity).
Additionally, `Severity[Level]1` constants are defined to make the API more readable and user friendly.

```go
type Severity int

> const (
> 	SeverityTrace1 Severity = iota + 1
> 	SeverityTrace2
> 	SeverityTrace3
> 	SeverityTrace4

Reviewer 8: Exported consts like these should never be defined in terms of `iota`, because `iota` is not stable over time. As an example, consider an innocuous-looking future change like the following:

```diff
 const (
 	SeverityTrace1 Severity = iota + 1
 	SeverityTrace2
 	SeverityTrace3
 	SeverityTrace4
+	SeverityTrace5
```

This changes the actual values of all subsequent const declarations in the block. SeverityDebug was previously defined as 5, and is now defined as 6. This breaks compatibility. 

Instead, define exported consts with explicit values.

```suggestion
const (
	SeverityTrace1 Severity = 1
	SeverityTrace2 Severity = 2
	SeverityTrace3 Severity = 3
	SeverityTrace4 Severity = 4
```

(and so on)

Author: Thanks from your comment.

1. All exported API should have unit tests to avoid making breaking changes. Here are the tests from the prototype: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-go/blob/e5dc7cf2f0e8b24fbcaf26cfd8b9f5fd5d4dc819/log/severity_test.go. We also have [a step](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-go/blob/main/RELEASING.md#breaking-changes-validation) in releasing process to double-check if there are not breaking changes in the stable API (it would be better if it is integrated  in CI, but this is a separate issue).
2. I agree that using `iota` can be more error-prone. However, take notice that it affects GoDoc (package documentation). I find `iota` cleaner when the underlying value is "not important" (has no underlying meaning). Therefore, I think that we could use exact values (instead of `iota`) for `Severity` constants as these are defined by [the specification](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/logs/data-model.md#field-severitynumber). However, I prefer `iota` for `Kind` constants. PS. Take notice that someone can still make breaking changes when `iota` i used.
3. From API design perspective, this is an implementation detail and we can decide later during implementation if we should use `iota` or not.

Author: SIG meeting notes:
We will change to use the values explicitly, because they are defined by the specification.

Author: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-go/pull/4809/commits/9ab454632d24f97bdf967dbc4eba7604b7e86396

are accessed using following methods:

```go
func (r *Record) WalkAttributes(f func(KeyValue) bool)
func (r *Record) AddAttributes(attrs ...KeyValue)
```

`Record` has a `AttributesLen` method that returns
the number of attributes to allow slice preallocation
when converting records to a different representation:

```go
func (r *Record) AttributesLen() int
```

Additionally, `Record` has a `Clone` method facilities
coping a record with no shared state (attributes "back" slice):

```go
func (r *Record) Clone() Record
```

The records attributes design and implemntation is based on
[`slog.Record`](https://pkg.go.dev/log/slog#Record).
It allows achieving high-performance access and manipulation of the attributes
while keeping the API user friendly.
It relieves the user from making his own improvements
for reducing the number of allocations when passing attributes.

The following defintions are implementing the abstractions
described in [the specification](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/logs/#new-first-party-application-logs):

```go
type Value struct{}

type Kind int

const (
	KindEmpty Kind = iota
	KindBool
	KindFloat64
	KindInt64
	KindString
	KindBytes
	KindList
	KindMap

> )

Reviewer 8: Same thing here as above.

Author: SIG meeting notes:
1. Implementation detail
2. We prefer to have it as it is (iota)

	SeverityDebug = SeverityDebug1
	SeverityInfo  = SeverityInfo1
	SeverityWarn  = SeverityWarn1
	SeverityError = SeverityError1
	SeverityFatal = SeverityFatal1
)
```

[`SeverityText`](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/logs/data-model/#field-severitytext)
is accessed using following methods:

```go
func (r *Record) SeverityText() string
func (r *Record) SetSeverityText(s string)
```

[`Body`](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/logs/data-model/#field-body)
is accessed using following methods:

```go
func (r *Record) Body() Value
func (r *Record) SetBody(v Value)
```

[Log record attributes](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/logs/data-model/#field-attributes)
are accessed using following methods:

```go
func (r *Record) WalkAttributes(f func(KeyValue) bool)
func (r *Record) AddAttributes(attrs ...KeyValue)
```

`Record` has a `AttributesLen` method that returns
the number of attributes to allow slice preallocation
when converting records to a different representation:

```go
func (r *Record) AttributesLen() int
```

Additionally, `Record` has a `Clone` method facilities
coping a record with no shared state (attributes "back" slice):

```go

> func (r *Record) Clone() Record

Reviewer: Do we need this in the initial design?

Author: We should if I would like to add it in the initial version of the API.

I think a better question would be "do we need it in the initial version of the API?".

Possibly not and we can always add it later. WDYT?

Reviewer: Yeah, you are correct, my question was more about the initial API as well.

Do you see a use for it in our initial SDK? I was thinking things would be processed synchronously and the need to directly clone the record unneeded. Is that not what your exploration found?

Author: You are correct.

Author: fe8362c2

func WithInstrumentationAttributes(attr ...attribute.KeyValue) LoggerOption
func WithSchemaURL(schemaURL string) LoggerOption
```

Implementation requirements:

- The [specification requires](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/logs/bridge-api/#concurrency-requirements)
  the method to be safe to be called concurrently.

- The method should use some default name if the passed name is empty
  in order to meet the [specification's SDK requirement](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/logs/sdk/#logger-creation)
  to return a working logger when an invalid name is passed
  as well as to resemble the behavior of getting tracers and meters.

`Logger` can be extended by adding new `LoggerOption` options
and adding new exported fields to the `LoggerConfig` struct.
This design is already used in Trace API for getting tracers
and in Metrics API for getting meters.

Rejected alternative:

- [Passing struct as parameter to LoggerProvider.Logger](#passing-struct-as-parameter-to-loggerproviderlogger).

### Logger

The [`Logger` abstraction](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/logs/bridge-api/#logger)
is defined as an interface:

```go
type Logger interface {

> 	embedded.Logger

Reviewer 7: Did you consider an `Enabled` method so callers could avoid creating a `Record` when it wouldn't get logged anyway?

Author: I do not think it is needed. This API is intended to be used for implementing bridges. This means that the application code would use e.g. `slog`. The user would use slog methods can use `Enabled` method to determine if he wants to log.

Author: @open-telemetry/go-approvers should I include this in "rejected proposals". Add 👍  if you think that it would be good to do so.

Author: 16c316e2

	SeverityWarn2 Severity = 14 // WARN2
	SeverityWarn3 Severity = 15 // WARN3
	SeverityWarn4 Severity = 16 // WARN4

	SeverityError1 Severity = 17 // ERROR
	SeverityError2 Severity = 18 // ERROR2
	SeverityError3 Severity = 19 // ERROR3
	SeverityError4 Severity = 20 // ERROR4

	SeverityFatal1 Severity = 21 // FATAL
	SeverityFatal2 Severity = 22 // FATAL2
	SeverityFatal3 Severity = 23 // FATAL3
	SeverityFatal4 Severity = 24 // FATAL4

	SeverityTrace = SeverityTrace1
	SeverityDebug = SeverityDebug1
	SeverityInfo  = SeverityInfo1
	SeverityWarn  = SeverityWarn1
	SeverityError = SeverityError1
	SeverityFatal = SeverityFatal1
)
```

[`SeverityText`](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/logs/data-model/#field-severitytext)
is accessed using following methods:

```go
func (r *Record) SeverityText() string
func (r *Record) SetSeverityText(s string)
```

[`Body`](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/logs/data-model/#field-body)
is accessed using following methods:

```go
func (r *Record) Body() Value
func (r *Record) SetBody(v Value)
```

[Log record attributes](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/logs/data-model/#field-attributes)
are accessed using following methods:

```go

> func (r *Record) WalkAttributes(f func(KeyValue) bool)

Reviewer 7: You call them attributes in the method names, but the type is KeyValue. What about making the type Attr or Attribute?

Author: 1. The name is the same as defined in attribute's package so I think it will be clear for people writing bridge implementations: https://pkg.go.dev/go.opentelemetry.io/otel/attribute#KeyValue. 
2. This type is also used for `Map`. This is why it is not called `Attribute` as there it is used to represent a "key-value".

Reviewer: Calling `KeyValue` `Attr` here might help reduce confusion about us having a duplicate type. When they share the same name it becomes less clear what the difference between to two are and which one you are using.

Author: @MrAliasLike

```go
type KeyValue struct {
	Key   string
	Value Value
}

type Attr struct {
	Key   string
	Value Value
}
```

?

Author: I see one big issue with this proposal. I do not think we want to have factory functions for both `KeyValue` and `Attr` types. It would make the API surface unnecessary big and we may even have problem with naming the functions.

Reviewer: I was thinking of just naming `KeyValue` `Attr` or `Attribute`, and having:

```go
func MapValue(kvs ...Attr) Value
```

Reviewer: I don't have a strong preference on this. My concern is more about the questions:

- Can we disambiguate the difference between `attribute.KeyValue` and `log.KeyValue` by using different type names?
- Can we reduce potential misuse by users by naming `attribute.KeyValue` and `log.KeyValue` differently?

Author: I am opposed as for a map this is a real "key-value" and not an attribute. Attribute has semantical meaning.

Reviewer: To @jba's point. New developers don't have the history we do with the `attribute.KeyValue` type. They may not intuitively know that `log.KeyValue` is an attribute in the OTel parlance.

Reviewer: From offline conversation with @pellared:

- This package is expected to have ~90% of its use be by us OTel developers. We plan to implement bridges for the most popular logging libraries ourselves. Given we will all have the context needed to disambiguate these overlapping names developer confusion shouldn't be too big of an issue.
- For those bridges not developed by us, those developers will likely look at our existing bridges for inspiration. Our correct use of these types will be a reference to them.
- We can document the choice in the `KeyValue` type documentation. Specifically, we can state that these are a super-set of `attribute.KeyValue` and they are used for more than just attributes (i.e. log body types).

Based on these points, I'm in favor of keeping the existing `KeyValue` name.

Author: Documented as rejected proposal 75710811

func (r *Record) AddAttributes(attrs ...KeyValue)
```

`Record` has a `AttributesLen` method that returns
the number of attributes to allow slice preallocation
when converting records to a different representation:

```go
func (r *Record) AttributesLen() int
```

Additionally, `Record` has a `Clone` method facilities
coping a record with no shared state (attributes "back" slice):

```go
func (r *Record) Clone() Record
```

The records attributes design and implemntation is based on
[`slog.Record`](https://pkg.go.dev/log/slog#Record).
It allows achieving high-performance access and manipulation of the attributes
while keeping the API user friendly.
It relieves the user from making his own improvements
for reducing the number of allocations when passing attributes.

The following defintions are implementing the abstractions
described in [the specification](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/logs/#new-first-party-application-logs):

```go

> type Value struct{}

Reviewer 7: I don't see how `Value` can hold information if it's an empty struct.

Author: This is an implementation detail that I did not want to call out in the API design.

You can take a look at [the prototype](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-go/pull/4725) that the idea is to have the implementation similar to slog's: https://github.com/pellared/opentelemetry-go/blob/logs-design/log/value.go

type Kind int

const (
	KindEmpty Kind = iota
	KindBool
	KindFloat64
	KindInt64
	KindString
	KindBytes
	KindList
	KindMap
)

func (v Value) Kind() Kind

// Value factories:

> func StringValue(value string)

Reviewer 7: returns `Value`?

Author: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-go/pull/4809/commits/c6e46ff82060e89f5ff77eb23effe8663008f6fb

func IntValue(v int) Value

func Int64Value(v int64) Value

func Float64Value(v float64) Value

func BoolValue(v bool) Value

func BytesValue(v []byte) Value

func ListValue(vs ...Value) Value

func MapValue(kvs ...KeyValue) Value

// Value accessors:

func (v Value) AsAny() any

func (v Value) AsString() string

func (v Value) AsInt64() int64

func (v Value) AsBool() bool

func (v Value) AsFloat64() float64

func (v Value) AsBytes() []byte

func (v Value) AsList() []Value

func (v Value) AsMap() []KeyValue 

func (v Value) Empty() bool

// Value equality comparison:

func (v Value) Equal(w Value) bool

type KeyValue struct {
	Key   string
	Value Value
}

// KeyValue factories:

func String(key, value string)

func Int64(key string, value int64) KeyValue

func Int(key string, value int) KeyValue

func Float64(key string, v float64) KeyValue

func Bool(key string, v bool) KeyValue

func Bytes(key string, v []byte) KeyValue

func List(key string, args ...Value) KeyValue

func Map(key string, args ...KeyValue) KeyValue

// KeyValue equality comparison:

func (a KeyValue) Equal(b KeyValue) bool
```

`Value` is representing `any`.

> `KeyValue` is represneting a key(string)-value(`any`) pair.

Reviewer 7: representing

Author: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-go/pull/4809/commits/c6e46ff82060e89f5ff77eb23effe8663008f6fb

`KindList` is used for a slice of values (in spec: an array (a list) of any values).
`KindMap` is used for a slice of key-value pairs (in spec: `map<string, any>`).

These types are defined in `go.opentelemetry.io/otel/log` package
as their are tightly coupled with the API and different from common attributes.

The internal implementation of `Value` is based on
[`slog.Value`](https://pkg.go.dev/log/slog#Value)
and the API is mostly inspired by
[`attribute.Value`](https://pkg.go.dev/go.opentelemetry.io/otel/attribute#Value).
The benchmarks[^1] show that the implementation is more performant than
[`attribute.Value`](https://pkg.go.dev/go.opentelemetry.io/otel/attribute#Value).

The `Severity`, `Kind`, `Value`, `KeyValue` may implement
the [`fmt.Stringer`](https://pkg.go.dev/fmt#Stringer) interface.
However, it is not needed for the first stable release
and the `String` methods can be added later.

The caller must not subsequently mutate the record passed to `Emit`.
This would allow the implementation to not clone the record,
but simply retain, modify or discard it.
The implementation may still choose to clone the record or copy its attributes
if it needs to retain or modify it,

> e.g. in case of asynchronous processing to eliminiate the possibility of data races,

Reviewer 7: eliminate

Author: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-go/pull/4809/commits/c6e46ff82060e89f5ff77eb23effe8663008f6fb

### Passing struct as parameter to LoggerProvider.Logger

Similarly to `Logger.Emit`, we could have something like:

```go
type LoggerProvider interface{
	embedded.LoggerProvider
	Logger(name context.Context, config LoggerConfig)
}
```

The drawback of this idea would be that this would be
a different design from Trace and Metrics API.

The performance of acquiring a logger is not as critical
as the performance of emitting a log record. While a single
HTTP/RPC handler could write hundreds of logs, it should not
create a new logger for each log entry.
The application should reuse loggers whenever possible.

### Logger.WithAttributes

We could add `WithAttributes` to the `Logger` interface.
Then `Record` could be a simple struct with only exported fields.
The idea was that the SDK would implement the performance improvements
instead of doing it in the API.
This would allow having different optimization strategies.

During the analysis[^5], it occurred that the main problem of this proposal
is that the variadic slice passed to an interface method is always heap allocated.

Moreover, the logger returned by `WithAttribute` was allocated on the heap.

> At last, the proposal was not specification compliant.

Reviewer 7: s/At last/Lastly/

Author: TIL. Thank you 👍

Author: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-go/pull/4809/commits/c6e46ff82060e89f5ff77eb23effe8663008f6fb
